## Question 4
**Critically discuss the motivation that may lead Ringo Components to implement a distributed database management system (DDBMS).**

We define a distributed database as a logically interrelated collection of shared data (and a description of this data) physically distributed over a computer network.

On the other hand, a Distributed Database Management System is the software system that permits the management of the distributed database and makes the distribution transparent to users. That is, a Distributed Database Management System (DDBMS) consists of a single logical database that is split into a number of fragments. Each fragment is stored on one or more computers under the control of a separate DBMS, with the computers connected by a communications network.

In this scenario, the motivation to use a DDBMS for this company would arise from the many advantages that DDBMS provide. These advantages are discussed below in relation to Ringo Components.


**1. Improved shareability and local autonomy**
   
The geographical distribution of an organization can be reflected in the distribution of the data; users at one site can access data stored at other sites.Since Ringo Components operates in different geographical locations, i.e. Asian, European and African Countries, a DDBMS would allow users to share and access data accross these locations with ease. Ringo Components also have many branches in a country whose clients can also be localised hence data can be placed at the site close to the users who normally use that data. In this way, users have local control of the data and they can consequently establish and enforce local policies regarding the use of this data.

**2. Improved availability**
With a DDBMS, Ringo Components would enjoy the benfit of fault tolerance. i.e. A DDBS ensures that data and services remain accessible even in the event of failures or network issues. Clients would still be able to access servies despite failure of one component.

**3. Improved reliability**
With a DDBMS, data is replicated across the regions. When one region or a site fails, clients will still be able to access the replica of that same data in other regions and as a result, the services will always be available almost all the time.

**4. Improved performance**
With DDBMS, data is located near the site of greatest demand, and given the inherent parallelism of distributed DBMSs, speed of database access is much faster. The company will enjoy the benefits of reduced latency and faster processing capabilities hence the performance of operations is improved.

**5. Economics**

Looking at Grosch’s Law, computing power scaled with the square of cost. But with a DDBMS, Ringo Component can scale thier services to another country or region by deploying their local servers to handle transactions in the new region without changing the entire system. This is much cost effective. Ringo Components can also pertition their storage in relation to Regions. For example Asian Region can have their own partition and as a result perform their local processing of transactions. This would reduce the cost of transfering volumes of data over a network from region to region. It is therefore evident that Ringo Components would be motivated by the economical nature of DDBMS.


**6. Modular growth**
In a distributed environment, it is much easier to handle
expansion. A Distributed Database Management System (DDBMS) would offer Ringo Components cost-effective, modular growth by enabling seamless expansion without disrupting operations. For example increasing database size, and changing hardware components would not result into a total shutdown of services.

**7. Reflects organizational structure**

Many organizations are naturally distributed over several locations.  Ringo Components also operates across multiple countries and this reflects the structure of DDBMS. It is natural for databases used to be distributed over these locations. Local branches can manage their own data efficiently while enabling headquarters to access consolidated global data when needed. This can be made easier with DDBMS and hence would motivate Ringo Components.

**8. Intergration**

A DDBMS would enable seamless integration of data across Ringo Components’ global operations without requiring full centralization. With DDBMS, older systems can coexist with modern systems while avoiding disruptions, combining specialized tools to work together which can not be provided with a single system.

**9. Remaining competitive**

There are a number of relatively recent developments that rely heavily on distributed database technology such as e-business computer-supported collaborative work, and workflow management. To remain competitive, Ringo Components must leverage distributed database technology to support modern business demands.

